Hello.
Welcome to part two of iOS games.
Working on game design.
My name's Graeme Devine.
Gonna be talking today
about game design on iOS.
Just quickly,
how many of you are iOS game people
out there and have apps in the store?
That's absolutely awesome.
It's most of you.
Wow.
Well, in part one,
we kind of went over the secret sauce
to a whole bunch of iOS technologies.
You know,
how Game Center works and how the
new turn-by-turn gaming API lets
you make these turn-by-turn games,
which are absolutely, you know, gonna,
I think, really change the way that
we approach games on iOS.
Nate talked about the cloud and how
to sync up to the cloud and how we
can share between multiple devices
the preferences of our application and
storing them there and then bringing
them back down and the code to do that
with the short notification thing.
Talked about GL kits and how
easy it is to load textures.
And apply effects and do math and to set
up a render loop and make those things
much easier than they've been before.
And finally, talked about AirPlay and how
wonderful AirPlay is that,
you know, it's so easy to set up a second
display now from our iPad 2 and
broadcast that onto our HDTV.
I think that's really gonna massively
change games and we'll talk about
how some of those game design,
about some of that game design
later on in the talk today.
So, as Nate said,
it really is a fantastic time
to be making games for iOS.
I mean, wow!
You know, we are a long way from that
first generation iPhone.
We have graphic systems which are
so much more powerful now than
they were on that first phone.
The iPad 2 is an
incredibly powerful device.
It's just, I think it's the best gaming
device on the planet by far.
The SDK has changed.
We have new and powerful
technologies like Game Center with
50 million people online,
you know,
wanting to play games and the ability to
build that right into our applications.
Most fantastic though,
I say fantastic a lot by the way,
I'm like Doctor Who that way,
games themselves are also evolving.
Games have really changed from the
first games we put on the phone to
the games we're presenting today.
We're kind of still learning
our way about how to design the
best of breed games for iOS.
So, we're gonna take a look at some of
those games and what they're doing in
terms of game design and what I think,
you know,
really makes the best of breed game.
So today we're going to talk about
10 ideas for making games great.
And we're going to go through
each of those 10 ideas,
and hopefully by the end of it,
you'll know a little bit more
about making games for iOS.
Let's talk about number one:
design to the platform.
What do I mean by that?
I mean,
we've been making games for a long time.
There's a lot of game developers out
there who have made console games,
and console games are
absolutely fantastic.
They have controllers,
and the controller has buttons,
and the buttons do things on the screen.
And I'm looking at the screen,
and my hands aren't
looking at the controller,
and a typical controller now has,
you know, 10, 20 buttons on it that
do different things.
And, you know, we have to design games
that reflect that.
Game design has to reflect the
fact that it has a controller.
Whereas on iOS, we've only got one thing.
We've got a finger that touches glass.
And there's a huge expectation amongst
players there that as soon as they,
as soon as their finger
goes out and touches glass,
that something's going to happen.
Hopefully something magical.
And so, there's a very different
approach to game design,
and we need to be thinking about that
approach to game design right from the
very first thought about our new games.
It needs to think about
that actual difference.
In reality,
because we're also holding these devices,
we are holding the entire world
of our games in our hands.
And that's a very
powerful kind of metaphor.
If you think about the console games,
they've slowly got further
and further away from us,
you know,
across the other side of the living room,
now with wireless
controllers 30 feet away.
The fact I'm holding it in my hands,
and it's taking up so much
of my view on the iPad 2,
and I can tilt it around,
I can almost feel the world there,
and I can go and touch it.
It adds to the game when
I actually touch the glass.
I can actually feel the glass.
I can actually feel the world.
I'm actually going to interact
with that world behind me.
We'll talk about some of the
game design ideas there on how to
really make that feel interactive.
And now with Apple TV,
we're sharing the world.
We are broadcasting the world
from my iPad 2 to the TV set.
We're going to talk about what
that means because our eyeballs
might be somewhere else now,
and we might be thinking about
what to do with a touch device
and what that actually means.
So, a few years ago,
a game called Harbormaster
came out from Emoji Studios.
Are they out there?
Big cheer for them.
Because Harbormaster was kind of
that big duh moment in the sky of,
here is how you make a great touch game.
Here is how you make a game that
I'm going to draw around on the
screen and move those boats around,
draw their lines, and it's a touch game.
It's a fantastic touch game.
It's one of those games that you went,
oh my god, this is how to do touch games.
And so I loved it for that.
And if you think about that game too,
it is impossible to, you know,
it would be really hard to make
that game with a controller.
That game wouldn't be
very good with a joystick.
And that's exactly the kind
of thought process you need to
have in your mind when you think
about making a game for iOS.
I want this game to suck with a joystick.
Because, you know, you know,
Harbourmaster, you know,
touching the glass is that different.
If you aren't thinking that,
something's wrong.
You know, one of the things that's,
that's, you have, you know,
when you have these devices is that,
you know,
we have multiple iOS devices now,
and we hold them very differently.
So when I'm holding the iPhone,
I typically hold the iPhone and
I cusp it in my hands and I've
got my two thumbs doing stuff.
And it's, you know, that's the way that
I expect to play games.
Whereas when I'm on the iPad,
I kind of put my arm, you know,
behind the iPad and
I use one single finger.
And that one single finger is
affecting the world in front of me
and kind of doing interesting things.
And you can see this in Apple's
best of breeds applications.
And here's Apple's iMovie on
both the iPhone and on the iPad.
You can see on the,
that the interface is very
different between the versions.
They've thought about building different
versions for different iOS devices.
On the iPhone,
there it is cusp at the side.
I can use my thumbs.
You can see the information
directly in the center of the
screen and the timeline underneath.
And you can see on the iPad version,
it's designed for holding
with one hand back and playing
around with a single finger.
And you can see on the iPad version,
it's designed for holding
with one hand back and playing
around with a single finger.
That user interface change means
that you cannot just up-res
your application on an iPad.
You can't just say,
"Here's my game." Suddenly my graphics
are a little bit bigger and my screen
interface is going to be the same.
You really need to think about
how people hold these devices.
You need to look at that in your
game design if you're making a
game which runs both on the iOS,
iPhone, and iPad.
So, this is Quest we showed last year.
There are two ways of
interacting with a game world,
as I talked about.
There is the indirect method
of using a virtual D-pad.
We'll talk about those more later.
And you can see the virtual D-pad there,
and I'm going to move it around,
and the character's going to move
around or do something indirectly,
and that's an indirect
approach to game design.
And then I'm going to press
the buttons underneath,
and it's going to launch magic
missiles and do all sorts of things.
Or there is the direct approach of
touching the world in front of me,
which is typically when I have an iPad
and I open up a game for the first time,
that's what I'm going to try to do.
I'm going to try and touch the screen,
because I expect when I touch
the screen something to happen,
because it happens in
every other application.
It happens in photos, it happens in mail,
it happens in -- I expect
things to happen directly.
So, directly interacting with the
world is kind of the expectation
I have from that application.
Now if we look at some absolute
best of breed applications
that deal well with touch,
we see Words with Friends.
It's a board game implementation.
And when you pick it up,
you know right away how to play the game.
I'm going to be picking up a tile,
moving it around,
and dropping it on the board.
There's no instruction
book that comes with it.
It's not indirect.
I'm not here guiding with a
virtual D-pad and moving up and
down and going left and right.
It seems obvious,
but I've got to point this out.
Crazy's Contraptions,
an absolutely excellent game that
I see three and four year olds playing.
You can give them an iPad
and they grok right away.
I can move these things around on
the screen and something happens.
I mean,
how fantastic is that that you can
give a device to someone and right
away they get how things work?
And of course, Harbormaster.
And as I think about these games,
what I kind of notice about these games
is they have staying power in the charts.
They kind of stay in the top 25.
Because people get them,
they know how to use them,
they keep playing them.
Absolutely wonderful games.
Now when I think about indirect
interaction and virtual D-pads,
what I'm saying to my game player when
I have a virtual D-pad on the screen is,
"My game is better with a joystick."
"My game is more fun on Xbox Live,
but I couldn't think of any way
to make my touch work directly,
so I'm giving you a
virtual D-pad." And that,
to me,
is not such a great way to interact
with the world in front of me.
Some games also draw cursors
that I'm going to move around,
and that's kind of the way
that the game is going to work.
Some games have jump buttons on the
other side as well as the virtual D-pad,
so I'm kind of cusping my hand there,
side to side,
which is great for the position,
but it's a bad way to implement a game
design where I want to touch the world.
So I really encourage you to think about
the way that I interact with the world
and the way that I touch the world,
and the way that I move away from virtual
D-pads as the major input into games,
because we have a glass interface.
It doesn't come with a joystick.
And also when I think about those games,
I try to think of how many of those
games are in the top 25 that stay there.
I couldn't think of a lot.
So, something that's, you know,
really strikes home perhaps more than
anything is that those games don't have,
you know, don't tend to have the same
staying power that games have,
you know, the direct interaction do.
So,
when you think about a touch interface,
one of the things to think about
is discoverability and usability.
Here's a card game,
and the card games are easy to pick up.
You kind of know what to do.
I'm going to want to move my
card around on the screen,
so how do I do that?
I'm going to point at
my card and drag it.
And that seems kind of obvious,
and that's exactly what it does.
I drag my card,
five of hearts up to the four hearts,
and it does the right thing.
Snaps into place, and the game continues.
Usability-wise, though,
the user might think in the end, "Well,
I'm doing that a lot.
I just want to touch the four hearts
and have the five hearts move up there."
So that's a little shortcut that you
can add in that lets the more proficient
users that want to find things later
be able to optimize your application.
You should always think about
the obvious thing first.
What is the first person who picks up
this application going to try and do?
They're going to try and move the card.
But after a while,
they're going to want to think about,
"What's the shortcut I can
achieve to do the same thing?
I want to just click on the four
of hearts and have that drag in
whatever is the appropriate thing
to do on the screen." So it's often
good to think about discoverability
and usability when it comes to
thinking about touch interface and
how things will work on screens.
Something to think about when you're
touching the world as well is that
interaction needs to be quick.
When I have a game up and running
and it's going at 60 hertz,
the game needs to be
running fast in front of me.
It needs to be running extremely fast.
But in word games,
it needs to be running at 60
hertz whenever I touch the screen,
because what happens is I'm
going to point at the screen,
pick up a ball, and move it around.
The ball's going to lag behind me
because I'm running at 10 hertz,
and me as the user,
I'm going to go back here
to try to pick up that ball.
Meanwhile,
it's gone here because that's where
the touch thing told it to go,
and then I'm going to try
to catch up to it again,
but it went back there.
And then I'm going to let go and
not play your app anymore because it
apparently can't drag the ball around.
You need to think about going
at 60 hertz even when you're
picking things up from the screen,
even in a simple game like Word for Word.
Feel free to ramp down to 10
hertz once the thing's down again.
Save on battery.
But think about putting 60 hertz
whenever you do any touch application.
So that's designing to the platform.
Number two, audio from the start.
Audio is incredibly
important in these games,
but it's also incredibly hard.
We have speakers, we have headphones,
people play at bus stops,
they play indoors, they play in school,
they play with mute on,
they play with mute off,
they play in all sorts of environments.
So designing audio in from the very
beginning is just a smart idea.
And thinking about audio from day one is
absolutely vital to get into your game.
So, a couple of months ago,
I was on Twitter, as I normally am,
and this tweet feed started to
go out of this constant thing of,
we got the Megatome and
we are the smartest.
And how many of you saw that that night?
If you're on Twitter that night,
you couldn't help but not see it.
And I went and looked at what
the hashtag was in Sorcery,
and I downloaded this game
called Sword and Sorcery.
And I was blown away by how
immersive the audio environment was.
I was dragged into that game world by the
audio environment and how lively it felt.
So to talk a little bit more about that,
I'd like to invite Nathan and
Craig to the stage to talk about
how they implemented that audio
design in Sword and Sorcery.
Thank you.
Hello, WWDC friends.
So, I'm Nathan Vella.
I'm here to talk a bit about audio
design in our game Superbrothers:
Sword and Sorcery EP.
It's a collaborative
project that my studio,
Capybara Games,
made with Superbrothers and Jim Guthrie.
So Super Brothers Sword &
Sorcery EP launched on the
App Store about two months ago,
and in that time it managed to
get about 200,000 downloads,
which made us super happy.
It received a ton of positive
press from both the gaming
media and the mainstream media,
and perhaps most importantly,
it got thousands of five-star
reviews from our fans.
Basically, it was this overwhelming
positive love fest,
and we couldn't be happier about it.
So, Super Brothers Sword & Sorcery
EP is an exploratory adventure
game with combat elements,
puzzle elements, but the main emphasis is
audiovisual style and soul.
And while Craig's pixels
are pretty awesome and make
for a wonderful screenshot,
we're pretty sure that the
main reason why people really,
you know, resonated with the game was
because of the audio design
and the music of Jim Guthrie.
So our goal with the project from
the very beginning was to create a
record that you could hang out in.
I could talk a lot about how we did that,
but it's probably best that we just
kind of show you what's shaking.
Craig's going to give
a little bit of a demo,
and I'm going to try to talk
over it a little bit to kind of
let you know what's going on.
So right away when you boot up,
what do you see?
A record.
Hopefully that kind of drives it in
that we're making a game that's just
as much about audio as anything else.
So once you get into the game,
one of the things you'll notice
is that there is an actual
environmental sound design.
The game world itself is making noise.
You can tap on bushes,
you can tap on characters.
There's vocalizations for
characters and also voice recording.
And all of the sound
effects are in the world.
They pan and attenuate.
Craig is going to go ahead
and open up the door there,
start walking up the mountain
with his pal Logfella and his dog.
And as you do,
you're going to notice right away that
music plays an extremely big component.
So, in this point,
the music is set to drive you forward.
You know,
you're walking along in the woods,
so it's walking along in the woods music.
As you enter the next room,
the environmental audio is going
to kind of play with the music,
so you're going to start hearing as
you approach the bridge some waterfall
action and a little bit of wind.
And the whole idea is to make
sure that you're in the world,
and then also that the music
is creating a mood and a tone.
At a certain point though,
music will change.
For example,
when you see the three-eyed wolf.
And now all of a sudden it's
stopped being a kind of moving
forward driving tune and it's
more into a creepy cautionary.
And if you're actually
playing with headphones,
we use stereo so that some audio
is coming out of the right,
some coming out of the left.
So that's about it for right now.
Hopefully you get the picture of how we,
you know, a little bit of an example of
how we used audio in the game.
So how do we go about crafting
the Sword and Sorcery EP?
Well, the very first step and a very
key step is actually going out
and finding an amazing musician.
So we went out, tapped Jim Guthrie,
who in Toronto is somewhat of a legend.
He's a rock star composer
and an amazing performer.
He keeps a relatively
low profile in the world,
but you probably know a
lot of his friends and
collaborators like Owen Pallet,
Feist, and the Arcade Fire.
So we're going to show a
quick little clip of Jim here.
He works a lot with both
analog and digital sounds,
creates a whole bunch of
different soundscapes with
a lot of different tools,
and then composes them all
together in GarageBand.
The idea being to create really rich,
really lush audio.
Now I'm going to pass it over to
Craig here from Super Brothers,
and he's going to talk a bit
about the process and so on.
Hi, good morning.
So I'm Craig from Super Brothers,
and on this project
I was handling the art,
the writing,
some of the initial design concepts,
and I was also really
involved on the audio side.
Previously I had worked
with Jim Guthrie's music.
I had made a couple of
amateur pixel music videos,
and this project is very much
an extension of that approach.
So the way it worked is
I actually had some of Jim's
music going back for a while,
and I was able to listen to the
songs over and over and over again,
and just sort of figure out what
the spirit of the song would be,
and then try to paint that
with the right color palettes,
the right sort of story concepts,
and just kind of clarify for myself
what I thought the idea was going to be.
What you saw there was like a
clumsy music video that I was able
to use to articulate my vision
to the Sword & Sorcery team.
The next step after previsualization
was actually getting that going in game.
So this is a playable
prototype running on iPhone.
Basically runs through the same thing
you saw with that previous music video,
but now we're actually doing it for real.
We've got the code,
we've got the mechanics,
we've got the input, the output,
and we've figured out
the sound and art assets.
The next step here, well,
the basic process for a lot of this
game was to start with the music,
start with Jim's songs,
figure out what those songs
would evoke for our project,
you know,
this sort of sword and sorcery concept.
I would paint or make
storyboards or make an animatic,
and then we would get it in-game,
get our headphones on,
and go and check to see how it felt
and what kind of ideas came from that.
After that, of course,
there was a lot of hard work.
There's a lot of iterative audio
design that happened in this project,
and we were using FMOD,
which is an audio middleware.
And there's actually an application
within FMOD called FMOD Designer,
and I was actually very
involved on that side,
even though I'm not
necessarily a sound designer.
I was able to go in and
swap in and out sounds,
change the panning and attenuation,
and then I was able to go
into my hero Jim's music,
cut it to pieces, and put it in,
and then kind of string logic.
together, which you can see on
that slide a little bit.
That was the idea of making the song
compositions react to the player's
progress and the player's decisions.
The other key part of this was that
Jim was involved from the start,
and as we got going,
we would have him stop by
the office every week or two,
get a new build,
we'd talk about it sort of together.
He'd go off and play it,
put his headphones on,
and basically score the experience
that he thought would make sense.
So he was very much a
co-creator on the project,
along with myself and Capybara Games.
So in the end, we actually did achieve
what we set out to do,
amazingly.
It really does feel like you're
walking through a record.
There's as much variety and craft and
texture as you might want from a record,
and it's all weaved together in this sort
of archetypical adventure video game.
And the icing on the cake with
all of this is that there's
actually a record out there,
Jim Guthrie's Sword and Sorcery LP,
The Ballad of the Space Babies.
It's on iTunes,
and we even went ahead and made
a vinyl limited edition copy,
which is sort of a dream come true.
We're all Jim Guthrie
fans on the project,
so being involved in a record release
of his is a really exciting proposition.
So a couple of takeaways
from this project.
We found there is an audience for songs,
style, and soul.
If you make something that
has audio in the foreground,
people will respond to it.
And despite what you may have heard,
they will take the time to put on
headphones and actually get immersed in
that handcrafted audio visual experience.
Second takeaway, very straightforward,
trust in the collaboration.
Make sure that everybody involved
is there to add to the project,
not just paste something on over top.
So for example, Jim would send us a song,
we'd listen to it and be like,
that is perfect, thanks very much,
full stop.
But then there were other times where
he would send us music and come to the
office when we started talking about it,
and we weren't really sure what it was,
where it would fit, how it would work.
But after we got it in game and
started playing and iterating,
we realized, wait a second,
this actually is the perfect
piece of music for that moment.
We just had to trust Jim.
And our last takeaway is
that anything is possible.
These machines are a few years old now,
but they're still very
much a blank canvas.
The audience that's out there doesn't
have as many preconceived notions
as on other video game platforms,
so you can surprise them.
You can take genres and mix them
together or make something that doesn't
even fit in any recognizable genre.
You can put audio out front
and make that a selling point,
and people will respond.
There will be some percentage
of that broad audience.
There will be some percentage of
the audience out there who will take
a risk on an unusual artist-driven
project like Sword & Sorcery.
So that's it.
If you'd like to check in
with us with any questions,
feel free to look us up on the internets.
Thank you.
Thanks, folks.
That game rocks.
I don't think I need to say
anything else about audio.
Let's talk about leveraging Game Center.
Game Center is an
incredibly powerful API,
but it offers a lot more
than I think people think.
Leaderboard is something built into,
you know, in the Game Center,
and it should be built into
every one of your applications.
Leaderboards are great.
You put the score up there, and,
you know, people go look at it.
But the real power of
leaderboards is kind of that
friend-to-friend offline challenge.
I'm going to play Nate, and I'm going to,
you know, beat his score at, you know,
some racing game or whatever.
And then I'm going to log online,
and he's going to see, "Oh,
Graeme's beating me.
I'm going to try and beat him."
And I'm going to go play that game.
So that offline mode encourages
people to go back to your game
and play it again and again.
You know, you get two friends
going together like that,
and you get a lot of engagement
or re-engagement in your game,
which is vital for bringing people back
to your game and getting people back in.
Achievements are also really interesting.
I mean, a lot of people put
achievements in of just,
"I've completed level one.
I've completed level two.
I've completed level three."
They're not really achievements,
but they're really boring.
The best achievements are
the creative and fun ones,
the ones where I have to
go through a level without
shooting a gun once and win,
the one where I have to go
around a racetrack backwards and,
you know, not crash into any cars.
Because people look through
those achievement lists,
and they're thinking, "Well,
I can go do that now.
That sounds kind of interesting and
different." And what that adds to your
game is it adds the ability in your game
for you to add ways for your players to
find different ways to play your game.
Perhaps they're stuck
playing just the one level.
Perhaps they're just
playing the one mode.
But they're going to see an
interesting-sounding achievement,
and they're going to go
try that different mode,
and perhaps it opens up a whole bunch
more re-engagement in your game.
Interesting achievements are
vital to great game design.
At the conference today, or yesterday,
we announced turn-by-turn gaming.
And I try to think of, you know,
I think there's a fantastic API,
and there's going to be a lot of
just turn-by-turn games out there.
But every game,
single-player games especially,
should include this
API in their application.
It's now incredibly easy to add
a challenge mode to my game.
I'm going to play my game
as a challenge to a friend,
and I'm going to upload the random
number seed as the only piece
of data that I'm going to send.
I'm going to go send
that seed to someone.
They're going to play
exactly the same game.
Perhaps it's a game of cards,
and I'm going to have the same cards
that I'm going to play in front of them.
And it's a one-turn game,
but it makes any game,
any single-player game,
engaged with a friend,
that I can then have a challenge
to go and try and beat them.
And that's fantastic.
Every game should now be
including Game Center,
at least as that kind of mode.
I think about co-op action games, and,
you know,
I'm just playing a game where it's
one of those roly-marble games,
and I'm going to roll past, you know,
my friends.
of the score and it's going to then send
my new position finally out to him so
that I can see little flags side by side.
I really encourage you to think
outside the box when it comes to
API because adding that single player,
adding single player game elements
into the game is I think a fantastic
opportunity for every game.
Don't just think of the board
games I can go make of this,
think of every game as a
possibility for using this.
Game Center also adds photos.
I love putting photos in apps.
It just makes such a difference
to the screen that I can
go see the person's face,
and I can go see what's going on,
and I can go see if
it's my wife or my mom.
And it immediately brings you
engagement and love into games
because you put your loved ones
in there or your friends in there.
And that just makes the game more
attractive immediately to people.
They stick photos all around their house.
Let's get it on there.
So, Abraham Lincoln tweeted
this the other week.
Am I not destroying my enemies
when I make friends with them?
And that is so true.
The true power of Game Center is
actually the list of friends
I have in Game Center.
I have a list of friends that I can,
you know, when I start my application up,
I can log into Game Center,
my application can download that list,
and I know all these
people want to play games.
And that's incredibly powerful.
If I'm not doing something with that,
then I'm missing out on the biggest
opportunity that iOS has to offer.
You know,
I am able to get all those GK player
IDs and then do something with it,
whether it's socially, you know,
socially adding something, you know,
with my own server,
or doing something with Game Center,
or thinking of interesting ways to
use achievements or leaderboards.
That combination of friends and
that list of friends is the most
valuable thing in Game Center.
It's your friends.
It's, that's just,
I can't emphasize enough that, you know,
include this in every single game design,
even if you think that my
game is just for one player.
Because it's, you know,
no game is just for one player.
So that's thinking about
leveraging Game Center.
Wow, I paced a lot there.
Let's talk about going the extra mile.
Now, we've all done this,
we get very excited
about our applications,
super excited,
and our application's finished,
and we're going to upload
it onto iTunes Connect,
and it's going to be fabulous,
and it's going to do well,
and we're so excited that maybe
we forgot to add a little bit of
polish into the game that really
will make it go the extra mile.
And polish is really an absolutely
critical element of any game now,
because if you go look
at that top 25 list,
each of those games is highly polished.
And polish is more than just UI.
You should be thinking
about your UI from day one,
and using the new UI appearance,
and skinning your application,
and so forth.
But you should make sure that you've
added gameplay that engages and builds.
You should make sure that you don't
add all your aliens in level one,
and so forth.
And you should be adding gameplay which
really has levels that properly progress.
When your game is live,
you should be reading
the reviews on the board.
I know that's tough,
going into iTunes and
taking a look at those,
and reading the reviews
sometimes is very tough.
But often there's a thread
there of sanity that says,
"This game needs a mute button."
And you didn't think about that.
You didn't think, "Hey,
my game needs mute because it
doesn't need mute because it has
awesome audio." But you know,
players are out there, and unfortunately,
they want to play the
game on their terms,
and you should add preferences
that you yourself will never use,
because it will enable more players
to enjoy the rest of your game.
Going the extra mile also means
a little bit of thinking about
the actual devices I'm using.
Test your game on every
device you sell for.
It seems easy,
but your beta tester should be
able to help you cover this.
You should be able to at least test
on every single iOS device that
you're going to actually sell for.
It's amazing how many people just,
you know, the only thing they've tested
on is the simulator and,
oh my god, it doesn't run on the iPad.
Go test on real devices and play it.
Check every path through your app.
You know, when you add in-app purchase,
you know, it's wonderful,
but every time you go to test it,
you're testing the yes case,
because of course that's
what you want to test.
Does the in-app purchase work?
What happens when you tap no and say no?
Does the right thing
happen or does the app,
you know, crash?
Make sure that you test every
no path through your app.
Every possible path needs testing.
And think about when
you're making your app,
how the release and the debug
versions need to be different.
On Game Center, you know,
you have testing with friends and,
you know, you only have the three friends
that you have on Game Center when
you're testing in the sandbox.
When you go live, you've got 50 friends.
So those menus need to reflect the
ability to show 50 friends and not just,
you know, the three friends you have on
Game Center in the sandbox mode.
And finally, always keep in the back of
your mind that first update.
You will be making an update.
Think in the back of your mind
what you can do beside bug fixes
to offer more to your users.
Yes, fix the bugs,
but think about how I'm
going to increment my
application to the next level.
So, let's go in the extra mile.
Number five,
refinement of my application.
So, playtesting.
Playtesting is something that
seems like an easy word to say.
It seems like an easy thing to do.
The main thing you have to
remember about playtesting is,
you do not come with every app installed.
So, when you playtest your game,
when you hand that device over
and when you watch them play,
you have to remember to
shut up and not talk.
You have to watch them struggle
with your game and struggle with
what might seem obvious to you.
The game has a big red
button on it that says,
"Press here to start." And they're
just not finding that big red button.
They're trying to get this pixel
off the side of the bunny rabbit
to try and animate or do something.
And you really just
want to scream at them,
"Hit the big red button."
But they're not pressing it,
and they're not pressing it.
You have to hold back.
You have to listen to their
feedback afterwards as to
why they didn't press it,
what they didn't find obvious about it,
why that seemed so unobvious to them.
Because it is much better that
they complain to you now than
they complain on the App Store.
So playtesting and withholding
from telling people what to do.
Just remember, I don't come with the app
when people download it.
Something we're all guilty of
is scope refinement as we go
along when we're making apps.
And this really adds to
unrefinement of applications.
I unrefine an app.
I feature creep design.
I start making a card game, and I think,
oh, my card game's set in the old west.
I'm going to add guns thing to it so
that I can bring out guns and shoot
the cards when I don't like the deck.
Well, what the heck?
I'm going to add more
than guns thing to it.
I'm going to be able to shoot the
other player when I don't like
him and see him fall over with
rendering physics and real life.
Oh, what the heck?
There's that ability to tip the
table over and use that physics
thing to make the cards go into
the air and the coins will offer.
Sounds fantastic.
But it's no longer a card game.
You made a first-person shooter now.
You've moved beyond the
scope of your initial design,
but your initial game design and your
initial game class and everything you've
coded so far reflects a card game.
And a card game class can't
support a first-person shooter.
So, don't allow feature creeps to
really enter into your game.
Think about the game
you're making all the time.
As you are playtesting,
think about gathering stats.
Add the ability for your
application to gather stats on
when the player starts playing,
when they stop playing,
what level they're playing on,
when they die,
when they pick up power-ups,
and store those things on
a server and look at them.
If they're all stopping playing on level
3 because they're finding it too hard,
you might have to adjust level 3.
Perhaps you wanted level
3 to be really hard,
and it's not quite hard enough because
they're all zooming through it.
Capturing those stats during beta
testing is incredibly important.
It's how some of the big console
games get to be so finely tuned,
is that they sit and
gather stats from beta.
And don't be afraid to cut features.
The only person that knows
you've cut a feature is you.
When you sell your app,
they don't know that
you've cut a feature.
They don't know that the MMO mode
of your card game is missing.
Just think about keeping your
game scoped so you sell what
you initially went to make.
Cut features.
Let's talk about refinement.
Optimization.
This is a big subject.
That's why it's got two slides.
Optimization is incredibly hard.
The best way to optimize your
app is to step away from your
keyboard and take a walk.
You know, the first,
the most tempting thing to do is always
to jump into the profiler and to look
at the application and look at where,
you know, what Objective-C copy in
NSString is taking up all the time,
or the texture uploads
I'm doing too much.
But the absolute best
optimizer is your brain.
Your brain thinks better
than anything else.
It knows the application.
It knows how you use those algorithms.
It knows what's really going on.
It knows you have four million polygons
and that fire particle effect back there.
It might strike you when it walks,
maybe I should reduce
that to two million.
Use your brain first.
Take a break.
Take a walk.
Go look at something else.
Think about your application.
Then, by all means,
dive into some of the fantastic
instruments and tools that
Apple has to offer for profiling.
And I'm talking this
week about GL Analyzer,
GL Detective,
and GL Debugger built into Xcode now,
and the absolute fabulous
statistics that it offers,
breaking down your application
and the suggestions it offers
on how to fix your application.
Those tools are great,
but always remember,
use your brain first.
Amen.
One of the biggest things
to optimize is startup time.
When you start your app,
your app should be interactive
within three seconds.
You must think about this three
seconds as the three seconds of hate.
For every second that goes by,
I hate your application more.
This is what users think.
So you might as well approach this right.
So if your application is
taking 10 seconds to launch,
there's a lot of hate there.
And that's before you've
actually shown the first thing,
which is interactiveness,
before you've had a
chance to entertain them.
Do whatever you need to do
to have your application be
interactive within three seconds.
These people are playing
games at bus stops.
They're playing games in
all sorts of strange places.
They want to get your game quick.
They want to swap in and out
and be able to get there.
So think about what I can do to
make my game interactive quickly.
Defer asset loading.
Those 100 PNGs you have
loaded for the first level,
you don't need to load them.
Bring up the menu stuff.
Think about threading.
It's tough to get threading right,
but if you get it right, it rocks.
Work out what's going on.
Do I really need those 20
sound files right away?
Well, no.
You're bringing up a menu.
Optimize your startup time.
It's the most critical
element in your game.
It's the first thing users see.
Optimize battery life.
This is something we really
have to think about with iOS.
It's kind of an interesting thing
to optimize for because it seems to
offset some opportunities that we want.
But all these devices run off batteries,
and our game players are very
sensitive to power-hungry applications.
If I start up your game and I play
it for 10 minutes and I close down
and I'm suddenly at 30% power,
I'm kind of going to remember that.
I'm going to remember that your
application chews through power.
Test and retest between updates.
Whenever you make an update for an app,
make sure that your application
is still as power-misery as
possible as it was before.
There is an absolutely
fantastic app for testing this.
The Instruments has the power
measurement tool in Xcode.
Start up Instruments,
you go measure power.
It shows you in your
application what's using power.
It's the CPU, the GPU, the GPU.
The GPS, the GSM radio, the other radio,
the other radio.
It shows you what's on your device
and it gives you an estimation of
how much power you're currently
using on a scale from 1 to 20.
And that is an incredibly powerful
way to be able to measure your
application and take a look at
the amount of power you're using.
So always remember to look at the
battery life and look at what power
you're using inside an application.
Optimization.
Three slides, you need to optimize.
Connection, and being able to
connect to applications.
This is something I really
started to look at recently,
and I've started to add it
to all of my applications.
It's adding a new section
into applications that enables
me to talk to my audience.
You know, I started learning how
to do server programming,
and what it kind of meant to
actually run my own server.
We should all be thinking about that,
because it's incredibly easy.
Running your own server with the
ability to push news to applications
is and may well be your only
marketing channel that you own.
I love little news
sections in applications,
because my application starts up,
it can query my server to
see if there's any new news.
If there is new news,
I can make a little thing flash and go,
"Boof!" And then my user can opt in,
and can opt in to go look at that news.
And I never force that
news to come up saying,
"Whoa, blah, blah, big news,
new news," because my users,
I want them to love my games.
I want them to love me as a developer,
and love me and love my company.
And if I've made a fantastic game,
if I've made a game that
people enjoy playing,
if I've made something
which is compelling,
they will want to have
another game from me.
You know,
they want to play the next game,
so that when that news thing goes off,
boy, they're going to go to it.
I don't have to force things
in front of people's faces.
One of the things when you
add a news text into your
app is you need to update it.
I employ my sister now to
write my news things for me.
She used Hype on the Mac to
write great little iOS websites.
If I'm going to log into your app,
see news come up,
and it's going to say September 2010,
I'm going to think,
"This app is stale." It does
add another load to you to do,
but it's a way of engaging your audience.
Something that I saw in AppNuts by
Limbic Software was right on the
first page it's got a feedback button.
And absolutely incredible.
It's just sitting there on a
little post that says feedback.
And it comes up and it
comes down to some text.
Hey, if you love this game or if
you don't love this game,
send us some feedback.
It hit that,
it comes up with a little mail thing.
It's not intrusive.
It's not doing anything.
It doesn't hurt the game.
But it allows your game players
to directly talk to the developer
and to send them some feedback.
Because the only other place they
have to send you feedback is in
the app review section of iTunes.
You know, because going anywhere else,
going to the support page of your
web thing and finding email address,
clicking on that, opening up mail,
if you've not done it right,
so I've got to cut and paste,
can provide all sorts of hard ways
for users to get your feedback.
But putting it in game
I thought was genius.
You know, just that little button there,
you know,
probably lets people provide feedback
with ideas for what they want,
what they're enjoying,
what they're not enjoying.
And I just thought that was absolutely
perfect touch to add to that game.
By the way, I love that game.
Always make that opt-in.
Guess there's some devs in the audience.
Don't force this.
Don't come up and say, hey, rate my app.
I've been guilty of this in the past.
We have the ability now to
make all of this opt in.
Like I said, your developers,
your game players will love your app.
If they do, they'll want to send you
feedback telling you so.
And finally, in community,
add to the community.
That group of friends I told
you about in Game Center,
extremely valuable.
One of the fabulous ways to leverage that
is to form a community around your game.
So jump flags,
when I'm playing a jump game,
to show it as I'm jumping up
higher and higher and higher,
here's my friend, here's my friend,
here's my friend.
And just seeing that,
so those flags go by,
kind of makes me feel as if
I'm playing a multiplayer game,
even though I'm just playing on my own.
When I'm playing a race car game,
I love to be able to download
other people's race cars and
race around a track and see them
race around their ghost cars so
I can try to race them virtually.
I'm not playing head to head with them,
but I've downloaded their data so
I can see how they race around a track
and I can virtually race against them.
Finally, sharing puzzle solutions.
I thought this was absolutely
fantastic in Casey's Contraptions.
It comes up with two things.
I can go share my
solution with my friends.
I can go take a look at their solutions.
And the fact that I can go take a look
at their solutions and how they ran,
what they scored,
it's kind of just a little thing that
adds to the game that makes me feel
connected as I'm playing the game.
Whenever I see my friends,
I'm going to have a
conversation about them.
"Oh, I saw you use those crazy cars in
that one solution." Adding community
in the games is incredibly powerful.
I encourage you to do that in
every single application now.
Talking about connections.
Next, localization.
Localization is getting
to be much more important.
I'm going to talk to you here really
about the four things I kind of
consider important about localization
and how they go along the way.
First one is to always design
your app for localization.
You know,
we're all guilty of having a whole
bunch of Objective-C files that
we just put the strings into,
you know, the at OK and the NS alerts and
so forth so that it's right there.
And it's convenient
to do as we're coding.
There's no doubt about that.
But if your app then has
100 million downloads,
you think, well,
I should localize for China.
You know, try to get this to 100 million
downloads in a different country.
You haven't thought about
localization from the very beginning.
It's a real pain to be able to
go back and localize properly.
And Objective-C and NSString obviously
allow us to easily localize and
set up for localization from the
very opening of your application.
Just adding, you know,
localized strings so that the
table that goes looks it up.
You know, so design for localization,
build that in at the very
least because markets outside
North America are growing rapidly.
If you can't localize
your app completely,
at least think about localizing
your iTunes description.
Now, a lot of game players,
they can work out left, right, fire,
and score.
These are things they recognize.
But the iTunes description is the
first and foremost point of contact
between you and the game player.
It's the most text they will
ever see about your game.
You know, they're going to base
their decision to download,
try it, purchase it,
based upon that description and
that localizing right there.
It's a huge difference.
It's the easiest thing to do as well.
You know, in iTunes Connect,
to be able to localize it
into the local languages.
I don't have to add it
into my application.
But it's the major point of contact,
you know, between me and my player.
It's the first point of contact.
And that decision will be
based upon that localization.
And finally, I really encourage you to
localize all your apps.
To actually make that app personal,
you know,
for that localization to be played in.
This is a changing world
that we're playing in now.
We're selling games across the world.
Fortunately, there's lots of languages.
That's localization.
Getting games up and running.
We're making games.
Games are fun.
So I think games should
be running on day two.
That's where,
if your game isn't running on day two,
then you're kind of
working on something else,
not the game.
Now, there's lots of ways to play games.
One of my favorite ways of
playing games is to make cards.
But whether you're playing
your game on paper,
chalkboards, whiteboards, or cards,
you'll get your game running,
whether it's running in-game.
Your game might be played with cards,
but a turn,
which is going to take a tenth
of a second on the iPhone,
takes 15 minutes to play with cards.
And that is a fantastic opportunity.
It lets you engineer at the
15-minute level what's going to
happen in a tenth of a second.
It's like going into the quantum level
on my game mechanics and adjusting it.
It's like adjusting it in slow motion.
How perfect is that?
That tenth of a second becomes perfect
because I've worked on a game with cards.
I've worked on a game
outside of the game engine.
I've thought about how those
mechanics work very carefully.
And that reflects, finally,
when you get the game running,
that you have that math right.
You have that hit structure right.
You have that approach right.
Think about playing your game
constantly on day two and
playing it every single day.
From the second day on.
No matter what.
Think about what you
need to do to play it.
Never let technology stop
you from playing your game.
One of the things that stops us
from getting the game running often
is our need as game programmers
to make the super-duper renderer.
Very technical term.
The super-duper renderer is this
HDR renderer that has all this
real-life lighting and these
fantastic shadows and fall-off and
HDR and sun glints and I look up and
HDR changes to the ground and so forth.
And has real physics that let things
tumble down from the ground and buildings
fall over and all this wonderful stuff.
And it's fantastic.
Absolutely fantastic stuff.
You know, who doesn't want to work
on something like that?
It's absolutely terrible if you have
an eight-week dev cycle and you spend
the first seven weeks working on
the renderer and the physics engine
and the last week working on a game.
That's going to mean your
game is going to suck.
Why the fantastic renderer?
Normally views might reflect that,
but your game sucks equals no sales.
Work on the game.
Remember what you're actually selling.
Selling a game.
Wow.
Ooh, get up and running.
Let's talk really about
embracing the platform.
We're making games for the iPhone,
the iPad, the iPod Touch.
The iOS SDK offers a stable
foundation to build upon.
Now, as game programmers,
we love to roll our own.
We love to roll our own
user interface design.
We love to roll our own input scheme.
We love to roll our own sound
engine that mixes the PCM directly
onto the hardware pipe.
We love that stuff.
We love making our own castles
effectively and building a
huge moat around it so that our
game engine is our game engine.
But it's time to move on from
that way of thinking when we're
thinking about making games for iOS.
Building on top of the iOS technologies
is better than rolling your own.
It has expected behaviors.
When I have a UI button and
there is a lot of thought behind
how the UI button presses.
When the event happens on the tap
lift off and there's all sorts
of state changes and so forth.
And every other application
on the phone uses UI button.
So game players and users are
used to the way that this works.
They're used to the expectations
around the way the button works.
So why would you roll your own
button when there's a button
class that works the way users
expect in every other application?
Of course you should use UI button.
You should be using UI kit for
anything to do with interface.
Provides expected behavior.
You can finish your game faster because
you're building upon technologies
that have wonderful documentation,
that don't leak memory,
that have great Objective
C classes that are thought out,
that work together,
that are built on top of iOS
and provide a great framework
for your game to start off with.
And they let you be an iOS app.
Building in that way the game feels.
Users love games that feel the
way that they expect things
to feel on their device.
They love the iPad applications that
have the full screen feel to them.
It's kind of like the overall
direction that we're seeing some
of the user interface go with the
buttons and the switches and so forth.
Some absolutely great
stuff to be done there.
You have to remember when
you're working on iOS.
You can't just start
with a simple iOS device.
It comes with one button.
Well, some side buttons too,
but it comes mainly with one big
button called the home button.
And the home button really
is now your save game button.
Way back in the 70s and 80s when
we first started making games,
computers used to come
with floppy disk drives,
and we used to store 160
kilobytes on a floppy disk drive.
Now I can store more
than that in a cloud.
It's just amazing.
But we used to save a game,
come up with a dialogue saying
insert the floppy disk now.
We used to go clunk, clunk, clunk, clunk,
clunk, and it would save the thing.
We would take the disk out,
we'd mark it save game one.
And we kind of stuck with that metaphor.
We kind of stuck with the idea
of save game being something
that I'm going to go do.
I'm going to go make this action.
I'm going to have these slots.
I'm going to have these nine slots for
save games because that's the first
thing we did when hard drives came out.
Oh my God, now I can store multiple save
games next to each other.
But now the device is
kind of there constantly,
and users expect to exit out
by pressing the home button.
You need to be able to
save state right there.
You need to be able to save
your game right at that point.
Their expected behavior is
I'm going to come back to
your application where it was.
You need to be able to save right
there when things are going.
The game machine is also a phone,
or some of them are phones,
and they're going to ring.
People are going to want
to talk to that person.
It's going to be their mom.
And you have to play nice when they pick
up and answer the phone to their mom.
They're going to come back and
your game better be paused,
and if it's asteroids,
you might have thought
about moving something.
You might want to take some of the
asteroids out away from the impending
death syndrome they're about to have.
There's all sorts of things
to think about when it comes
to us being on a device.
And so now we're offering iCloud.
And I think about iCloud and
I think it's much more than syncing.
It's making universal
apps much more attractive.
I have this application which is my
space war application where on my
iPad version I'm moving my spaceships
around and they're going to sit
and get ready to attack the planet.
And they're going to take two weeks
to build and then they're going to be
here in three weeks and they're going
to bombard this planet on the ground.
And then when I play my iPhone
version of the same application,
it's a ground war and they're
being bombarded from space and
it offers much more opportunity
for making applications which do
interesting things between versions,
between the iPad version,
between the iPhone version,
between the version
I broadcast over AirPlay.
So different gameplay,
but the same world.
I think that's a huge opportunity to be
able to make something fantastic there.
So talking about AirPlay,
it's one of those things where
I think about AirPlay and
it really does offer some,
you know,
everyone cheered yesterday when it was on
screen and being shown as a game thing.
It's wonderful.
It's absolutely incredible.
Also offers some design challenges
that we need to meet now as well.
But when I broadcast to it, you know,
from my device to AirPlay,
where are my eyeballs looking now?
What is my expectation for
where my gameplay is looking?
If I'm expecting my gameplay
to look at the TV set,
and, you know, what is,
how are they going to interact with that?
How are they going to
interact with the game?
You know, with the iPad 2,
is it going to become one big button?
Am I going to use the gyro,
the accelerometer, move things around?
We really need to think about where
we expect players' eyeballs to be now.
Up until now, we've been lucky.
It's always been focused
right in front of us.
But AirPlay, you know,
changes things up a little
bit in terms of design.
We really need to be careful
to design good interface there.
So that people can still
continue to play our games and
enjoy them now on their HDTVs.
I think one of the huge opportunities
there is the opportunity of many
local devices surrounding a HDTV.
We've got to think about how to involve
those party games and think about
some of the games Nate made and how
to actually make that interactive.
I think that's going to become some
of the really killer games is that
many local devices with one iPad
connects up to via AirPlay doing
some absolutely wonderful games.
That's number 10.
Wow.
Made it through all 10.
Finally, make something fantastic.
We're in the games industry.
If we aren't getting up
every morning and thinking,
"Oh, what I'm doing is fantastic,"
you're in the wrong industry.
We're making games.
Everything we make is fantastic.
This is a fantastic
time to be making games.
I'm loving it right now.
Making fantastic games,
getting out of bed doing
this is absolutely wonderful.
So thank you.
Thank you for listening.
We have sessions on
Game Center today and tomorrow.
I encourage you to go to all of those,
although we have a lab this afternoon.
Come to our lab first.
iCloud sessions today and tomorrow.
Open GL ES sessions.
That's going to be
wonderful to sit through.
I'll be here sitting through all of
those tomorrow here in this room.
The AirPlay session, Presidio,
this afternoon.
And finally, if you have any questions,
Alan Schafer is your man.
I'm sure he'll be down
visiting our lab as well.
Here's his email address.
Send him your questions.
Thank you.
Let's go have some lunch.